In the previous lecture,
I introduced the plot function,
which generates a series of lines which
get rendered against an axis object.
Matplotlib actually has a number of useful
plotting methods in the scripting layer
which correspond to
different kinds of plots.
We are not going to go
through all of them here but
we'll touch on a few of the major ones.
Regardless, there are a few things
to keep in mind which we learned in
the previous lecture.
One, pyplot is going to retrieve the
current figure with the function gcf and
then get the current axis
with the function gca.
Pyplot is keeping track of
the axis objects for you.
But don't forget that they're there and
we can get them when we want to get them.
Two, also pyplot just mirrors
the API of the axis objects.
So you can call the plot function
against the pyplot module.
But this is calling the axis plot
functions underneath, so be aware.
And three, finally, remember that
the function declaration from most
of the functions in matplotlib end
with an open set of keyword arguments.
There are a lot of different properties
you can control through these
keyword arguments.
And I'll start peppering in some of
them this week to demostrate that
the matplotlib documentation
isreally key in
gaining a full understanding
of the options available.
With that in mind let's move on
to talk first about scatterplots.
A scatterplot is a two dimensional plot
similar to the line plots I've shown.
The scatter function takes an x-axis
value as a first argument and
y-axis value as the second.
If the two arguments are the same, we
get a nice diagonal alignment of points.
Let's do this now.
I'll bring in numpy as we're
going to use it later and
matplotlib is really
based on numpy arrays.
I'll create a short array for
x and make y the same.
Then create a new figure and scatterplot.
You can see in this plot
a nice diagonal line and
matplotlib has sized
our axises accordingly.
Now, scatter doesn't
represent items as a series.
Instead, we can pass it a list of colors
which correspond to given points.
Let's use some list arithmetic to create a
new list just short of the number of data
points we need and
set all of the values to green.
Then we'll add a final value of red.
Then we'll plot this, and
we'll set the size of the data points to
100 to make it a little easier to see.
The separation of data points into lists,
which describes them as components is
a pretty common pattern in matplotlib.
You have some set of items, but
they're actually described as the same
slice across many different data sources.
It's in one object-based language, but
you might expect that each data point is
represented with its own instance,
which encapsulates all of its properties.
For instance, it's called an x value and
a y value and a color and a size.
That's not the case here.
This is where it's useful to have some
knowledge of list comprehensions and
lambdas as we talked about
in the first course.
Also important is the zip function and
list unpacking.
And because this is so
common in the Python data science world,
I'm going to take a brief aside and
talk about that here.
Recall that the zip method
takes a number of iterables and
creates tuples out of them,
matching elements based on index.
So if we have two lists of numbers,
zip will take the first from each and
create a tuple, then the second from
each and create a tuple, and so on.
Also remember that zip has lazy evaluation
because it's actually a generator
in Python 3 which means we
need to use the list function
if we want to see the results
of iterating over zip.
Let's demonstrate.
Here we'll create a new zip
generator with a zip function
passing in two lists of numbers.
When we convert this generator to a list,
we see there's a list of pairwise tuples.
Storing point data as tuples is common and
you should be familiar with being able
to convert data to and from this form.
If we want to turn the data back into
two lists, one with the x component and
one with the y component,
we can use parameter unpacking with zip.
When you pass a list or an interval
more generally to a function and
prepend it with an asterisk,
each item is taken out of the iterable and
passed as a separate argument.
So we can do that here, passing into
a new zip function five parameters,
each of length two.
Zip will then create a new two value list
which is identical to our original x and
y values.
If we want to get even fancier,
we can unpack this result into
two variables directly, x and y.
So that's a brief aside
on a variable tool.
When it comes to manipulating and
cleaning data in the wild.
Now, let's get back to plotting.
Let's take these two lists and
plot them to a new figure using scatter.
Instead of plotting them as one data
series, we'll slice the lists and
plot them as two data series.
You'll note that we can color each series
with a single value if we want to.
We can also do things
like change the color or
transparency of an entire series,
or individual data points as well.
Finally, we have the ability to label
the data series, and I'll do that now.
This will come in handy later
when building a legend.
Now before we leave the scatter plot,
let's talk a bit more about
the properties of axis.
The axis generally have labels to them
to explain what they represent or
the units that they describe.
Charts tend to have titles as well,
so let's put this in place now.
Since pyplot mirrors much of the axis API,
we can make calls directly on pyplot.
Let's do this now, adding in an xlabel,
a ylabel, and then a title.
And let's add a legend as well.
You'll see that matplotlib places this
in the upper left hand corner and
puts a little visual about
our data series there.
In the docs for the legend, you'll see
that there are a number of different
parameters and one of them is called lock.
And a value of 4, we'll put it in
the lower right hand corner of the axis.
We could also get rid of the frame and
add a title, and
do any number of different
transformations.
The legend itself is an artist,
which means it can contain children.
Let's take advantage of this and
write a little routine to recursively go
through the list of children in an artist.
First, we'll import the artist
class from matplotlib.
Then we'll make a recursive function
which takes in an artist and
some depth parameter.
Then checks if the object is an artist and
if so, prints out its string name.
Then recurses and
increases the depth for pretty printing.
Finally, we can call this on
the legend object itself.
So you can see the legend artist is
just made up of a number of different
offsetboxes for drawing,
as well as TextAreas and PathCollections.
What I want you to take away from this is
that there is nothing magical about what
matplotlib is doing.
Calls to the scripting interface,
just create figures, subplots, and axis.
Then load those axis up
with various artists,
which the back-end renders to the screen
or some other medium like a file.
While you'll spend 95% of your time at the
scripting layer, happily creating graphs
and charts, it's important to understand
how the library works underneath for
the other 5% of the time.
And the time that you will use this is
when you really want to have control over
and to create your own charting functions,
and
you'll have a chance to do that
by the end of this course.
In the next lecture,
we'll go back into line plots and
create a few more then onto bar charts.